> **Abstract**: Their “serverless” nature truely fullfill the cloud promises of
> having as less as possible to manage to put something into world. This is a
> new cloud paradigm that lower the barrier of prototyping, experimenting and
> quickly gather feedback. The idea is to show how 1. How efficient a workflow
> can be 2. What does it mean for early cloud projects 3. How does it fit along
> containers

---

It has been a few months already that tech conferences and blogs are agitated by
the word _"serverless"_. Somewhat a promise that specific services or frameworks
can free you from thinking about servers and just let you push code out into the
wild. Of course servers are still there so what is new in the current IaaS
(Infrastructure as a Service) landscape ? Well this marketing bundles a much
more interesting idea : _lambda architectures_. A paradigm that splits projects
into straight functions, made available accross networks. Yes pretty much the
same concept that let tech teams convince their CTO to move to _microservices_.
But a step further. With a consistent approach on the architecture itself : one
feature that just wakes up to serve its purpose, then die instead of waiting
idle.

I think this is exciting. It makes projects easier to think about and much more
cost effective. But like micro services you actually fight new challenges :
service discovery, team education, resilience, multi-languages, multi-cloud. You
need everything and everyone to be coordinated. Yet, I pretend that lambda
functions, despite this, are a perfect fit for early projects and
experimentations - among other things (but that is something I let for other
engineers with different experiences on those matters). Read on and I hope it
will give you some tools to choose the stack of your next projects.



## An effective workflow

Architectures based on lambdas basically deploy one compute unit for one service that performs one thing. Needless to say when you go all-in on this and need to manage hundreds of services with execution steps triggered by each other, you can end up with spaghetti-logic-flows (of clean code, but well…).

![lambdas](/images/old-articles/cloudcraft-lambda.png)


I won't go further into the details of this situation but you probably need to
hire senior architects and read interesting articles on how to manage technical
debt or why micro services can bite back.

But today we will take a break and talk about fresh projects, tinkering,
experimentations. This time we want it simple, clear, effective. We want to just
get done the basics quickly : landing page, user management, payement. Then we
can add more differentiation features. But we are not sure yet which will make
the users to pay or love the product.

At the end of the day we try to iteratively and safely build the product by
defining blocks we can think of in isolation and only when we need it.
Dedicating lambda functions to those bricks fit this agile process and make for
a clear Minimum Viable Product roadmap.

What about a sudden idea ? Whatever your existing stack, follow your intuition
and quickly run a new lambda. Or kill it. Or replace it. Safe experimentations,
quick iterations.

---

So this is the kind of micro-services like popularized by Docker but mentally
cheaper ? Yes in some way. Call it nano if you want to distinguish but I believe
containers or lambdas are a detail of implementaiton to enjoy the same
arhitectural pattern benefits described above. _Lambdas_ enforce _1 service_ by
being _1 function_ and have the good idea of dying when they are no longer
needed. It forces developers to reason on small and stateless processing tasks.
Code solves one problem with minimal side effects. A great mix of good old UNIX
philosophy with latest functional trend. I'm biased but it serves developer
hapiness with strong community consensus isn't it ? And what does it take to be
as cool as that ?

```js
module.exports = function(context, callback) {
    callback(200, "Hello, world!\n");
}
```

Most frameworks and SaaS require you to expose a single function with an object
that can hold secrets, HTTP query attributes. Of course nothing prevent us from
writing 2000 LoC between `module.exports` and `callback()` but it quickly smells
like an anti-pattern.

And especially ease of deployment will quickly make it harder to maintain than
spliting our problems into manageable endpoint solutions.

```sh
$ # completely copy/pasted from http://fission.io/

$ fission function create --name hello --env nodejs --code hello.js
$ fission route add --function hello --url /hello
$ curl http://router.fission/hello
Hello, world!
```

and _Bam_ you have some code that will greet you over HTTP thanks to
[Fission](http://fission.io/). It requires you to have a
[Kubernets](https://kubernetes.io/) setup at hand but well, in 2017, who doesn't
have a self-hosted _"open-source system for automating deployment, scaling, and
management of containerized applications"_. But really if you don't have time or
don't enjoy administrating distributed clusters like you should, you are still
in good company. Big hosting players now offer competitive platforms to push
lambda on. [Webtask 101](https://webtask.io/docs/101) can indeed get you setup
in 30 seconds, without paying a penny.

```sh
$ # again, shamefully copy/pasted from https://webtask.io/docs/101
$ echo "module.exports = function(cb) { cb(null, 'hello world'); }" > foo.js
$ wt create foo.js
```

When you experienced how to kickstart a project like say
[React](https://reactjs.org/) and [Webpack](https://webpack.js.org/), this is
amazingly painless. Yet full featured :

```Bash
$ wt cron schedule \
  -n mongocron \
  -s MONGO_URL=mongodb://webtask:supersecret@ds047592.mongolab.com:47592/webtask-examples \
  10m \
  foo.js

```

And the lambda function now runs periodically, a really frequent use case as you
probably know.

On all aspects the barrier of entry is very low. We write code like we are used
to : functions. No new _Domain Specific Language_, no complex configuration. Or
they were quickly wrapped behind poplar frameworks like
[Serverless](https://serverless.com/) does for various cloud providers. And it
matters because new paradigms that don't force you to re-learn everything and
yet are immediately actionnable for our projects are usually getting a lot of
tractions. And a lot of tractions means a good eco-system of services,
libraries, help, articles. Which itself feeds the movement and so on.

Those frameworks and services are especially important for _Serverless_ because
the whole point is to save you the hassle from managing stuff unrelated to your
core project. But it uses non-trivial technologies and manage complex
infrastructures of ephemeral compute instances dynamically mapped onto gateways
to route traffic.

Self-hosted alternatives like `IBM OpenWhisk` brings in-house huge control over
your _serverless_ stack, without too fancy technologies (proxies, containers).
So may be you have the **devops** team and the investissement ready to make that
happen. No more third-party reliance, full customization allowed for very
specific business cases (or shortcut solutions). But servers are back so be
aware of the challenges (provisioning, configuration, maintenance, monitoring,
performances, security).

In the meantime let us focus on how we can leverage existing tools for fun and
profit.


## Early cloud projects

![architecture](/images/old-articles/lambdas-figure-1.png)

We saw that code was fast to write, deployments were cheap. Idea to online is as
frictionless as it can be and this is a double edged result. Much like twitter
you can end up just putting poor vanity idea in the cloud in no time or you can
live by the [Lean Startup](http://theleanstartup.com/) and use it to iterate
fast. Whatever the quality of your initial thoughts, make it public or share it
privately to gather feedback and experience. It can be a good proxy to assess if
your initial design or tech is simply relevant. Or build a landing page and
gauge interest. Either you will be able to focus on the graal, something people
want, or you will be fast to realise it doesn't worth to put more time in it.
Engineers usually don't like to cut an arm and give up on something they really
wanted to build (except for doing it again from scratch or switch to another
fancy tech). I can't help you fighting this syndrome but at least we can have
the right numbers to decide.

Our leitmotiv is to go fast and we can insist a little more : Lambdas can be
used to be DRY at the architecture level. I feel this argument is a bit weaker
than the other because like many good practices in computer science, it is only
as good as the author implemented it. Yet, _Serverless_ workflow promotes
decouple services with a single purpose, hence you can probably share some of
them, like payement processing, static site rendering, user registration and so
on. I definitely did and as you develop projects you will start to extract
patterns and share more an more services to go faster at the prototyping level.
I do believe though that it will probably break as project grow. From experience
we tend to specialise bricks to a point where it solves really specific edge
cases too. Keeping things as simple as possible, implementing only features we
really need, following the [open/closed
principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open/closed_principle) are no silver
bullets but it can go a long way.

But let's add some open-source and community ingredients here to our thinking.
Since we are talking about decoupled service with clear boundaries, sharing code
can extend further than our own stack. [Stdlib](https://stdlib.com/) raised
recently 2 millions for offering a _common library of functions_ accessible
through the network. Everything seems to point in this direction but i'm not
sure we are here yet. Maybe there is a lot to solve in trusting third-party
codes, in-house development trade-offs or adoption rate but I didn't meet a lot
of projects that leverage this opportunity. Yet, as a small idea, this is
something we can actually do to, once again, to go faster. Every services that
are common to early SaaS for example but don't represent a competitive edge
could be just plug so that we focus on this so-called competitive seed.

Although we listed some limitations of this approach, it is worth noting this is
something achievable inside an organisation too to empower development teams.

## Tech landscape

So far I fired most of the arguments I had in favour of using lambda
technologies for small prototypes. I hope it resonates with your experience or
may be push you to try it for your next move. But may be you caught many points
or keywords shared by microservices and containers articles. So I want to clear
confusions and situate where _lambdas_ fit on the current _devops_ landscape (a
small part of it to be fair).

First, none of those terms are mutually exclusives : you can design a
microservices architecture using lambdas that run code inside containers. This
is no accident _serverless_ is coming few years after Docker and containers
popularity. They unlocked powerful cloud orchestration and the agility _lambdas_
need to fire on events and die right after processing it.

From my point of view it comes down to developers usage and business goals.
Nothing will prevent us from putting [elefants in
containers](https://hub.docker.com/r/spotify/kafka/) or deploying microservices
on bare-metal machines. Those are tools you can leverage and combine depending
of your constraints. [Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/) for example markets
itself as a _"Production grade container orchestration"_ but tweak some bolts
and you get a [_"serverless framework_"](http://kubeless.io/). So :

- _Microservices_ is an architectural pattern that promote decoupled services
  with clear, small boundaries and interfaces.
- _Containers_ are a _linux_ feature that allow lighter isolation of processes
  than VMs thanks to [cgroups](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cgroups).
- _Lambdas_ are ephemeral _functions_ that wake up on events, process it and die
  after that.



## Conclusion

The startup where I work organized its first hackathon last week. We built many
projects in 24 hours and many of us ended up deploying _lambdas functions_.
Because it was fast. Because it was cheap (free actually). Because we could
split the work between team of three or four. The scope was clearly defined and
it was a perfect fit for event based projects (like developing slack bots). Some
of us discovered the framework for the first time and yet they were operational
in a few minutes, writing, deploying and monitoring _lambda_ code.

All of this quickly breaks when projects grow, like we mentioned. Yet as we
improve developer tooling I think this paradigm takes us in the right direction:
lazy execution, effective costs, ease of usage, ease of sharing. We probably
don't need to migrate all our professional infrastructures under the _lambda_
hat. We probably need les frameworks and more winners that just work. And we
definitely need to define how to deploy and maintain hundreds of functions.

So jump aboard. This is already an exciting technology for actionable reasons,
and we still have a lot more to contribute.
